---
title: Selection from "The First Person"
author: Elizabeth Anscombe
date: 1974
---

*Source: Anscombe, G. E. M. 1975. "The First Person." In* Mind and
Language, *edited by Samuel Guttenplan. Oxford University Press.*

* * * * *

It seems clear that if "I" is a 'referring expression' at all, it has
both kinds of guaranteed reference. The object an "I-user means by it
must exist so long as he is using "I", nor can he take the wrong object
to be the object he means by "I". (The bishop may take the lady's knee
for his, but could he take the lady herself to be himself?)

(This is appropriate, because people surely have here the idea of a sort
of pure direct reference in which one simply first means and then refers
to an object before one.) It seems, then, that this reference could only
be sure-fire if the referent of "I" were both freshly defined with each
use of "I ", and also remained in view so long as something was being
taken to be I. Even so there is an assumption that something else does
not surreptitiously take its place. Perhaps we should say: such an
assumption is extremely safe for "I", and it would be altogether an
excess of scepticism to doubt it! So we accept the assumption, and it
seems to follow that what "I" stands for must be a Cartesian Ego.

For, let us suppose that it is some other object. A plausible one would
be this body. And now imagine that I get into a state of 'sensory
deprivation'. Sight is cut off, and I am locally anaesthetized
everywhere, perhaps floated in a tank of tepid water; I am unable to
speak, or to touch any part of my body with any other. Now I tell myself
"I won't let this happen again!" If the object meant by "I" is this
body, this human being, then in these circumstances it won't be present
to my senses; and how else can it be 'present to' me? But have I lost
what I mean by "I" ? Is that not present to me? Am I reduced to, as it
were, 'referring in absence'? I have not lost my 'selfconsciousness';
nor can what I mean by "I" be an object no longer present to me. This
both seems right in itself, and will be required by the 'guaranteed
reference' that we are considering.

Like considerations will operate for other suggestions. Nothing but a
Cartesian Ego will serve. Or, rather, a stretch of one. People have
sometimes queried how Descartes could conclude to his *RES
cogitans*.[^1] But this is to forget that Descartes declares its essence
to be nothing but thinking. The thinking that thinks this thought - that
is what is guaranteed by "cogito".

Thus we discover that if "I" is a referring expression, then Descartes
was right about what the referent was. His position has, however, the
intolerable dilficulty of requiring an identification of the same
referent in different "I-thoughts. (This led Russell at one point to
speak of 'short-term selves'.)

Our questions were a combined reductio ad absurdum of the idea of "I" as
a word whose role is to 'make a singular reference'. I mean the
questions how one is guaranteed to get the object right, whether one may
safely assume no unnoticed substitution, whether one could refer to
oneself 'in absence', and so on. The suggestion of getting the object
right collapses into absurdity when we work it out and try to describe
how getting hold of the wrong object may be excluded.

How, even, could one justify the assumption, if it is an assumption,
that there is just one thinking which is this thinking of this thought
that I am thinking, just one thinker? How do I know that 'I' is not ten
thinkers thinking in unison? Or perhaps not quite succeeding. That might
account for the confusion of thought which I sometimes feel. - Consider
the reply "Legion, for we are many", given by the possessed man in the
gospel. Perhaps we should take that solemnly, not as a grammatical
joke.[^2]

[^1]: For example A. J. Ayer. See *Language, Truth and Logic* (2nd edn.
    London. 1946), p. 47.

[^2]: Ambrose Bierce has a pleasant entry under "I" in the *Devil's
    Dictionary*: "I is the first letter of the alphabet, the first word
    of the language, the first thought of the mind, the first object of
    the affections. In grammar it is a pronoun of the first person and
    singular number. Its plural is said to be *We*, but how there can be
    more than one myself is doubtless clearer to the grammarians than it
    is to the author of this incomparable dictionary. Conception of two
    myselves is difficult, but fine. The frank yet graceful use of "I"
    distinguishes a good author from a bad; the latter carries it with
    the manner of a thief trying to cloak his loot."
