---
title: Of Personal Identity
author: Joseph Butler 
date: 1736
source: http://www.ummoss.org/self/butler.html
---

*Source: Joseph Butler,* [The Analogy of Religion][], *Appendix I.*

*****

Whether we are to live in a future state, as it is the most important
question which can possibly be asked, so it is the most intelligible one
which can be expressed in language. Yet strange perplexities have been
raised about the meaning of that identity, or sameness of person, which
is implied in the notion of our living now and hereafter, or in any two
successive moments. And the solution of these difficulties hath been
stranger than the difficulties themselves. For, personal identity has
been explained so by some, as to render the inquiry concerning a future
life of no consequence at all to us, the persons who are making it. And
though few men can be misled by such subtleties, yet it may be proper a
little to consider them.

Now, when it is asked wherein personal identity consists, the answer
should be the same as if it were asked, wherein consists similitude or
equality; that all attempts to define, would but perplex it. Yet there
is no difficulty at all in ascertaining the idea. For as, upon two
triangles being compared or viewed together, there arises to the mind
the idea of similitude; or upon twice two and four, the idea of
equality; so likewise upon comparing the consciousness of one's self, or
one's own existence in any two moments, there as immediately arises to
the mind the idea of personal identity. And as the two former
comparisons not only give the idea of similitude and equality, but also
shows us, that two triangles are like, and twice two and four are equal;
so the latter comparison not only gives us the idea of personal identity
but also shows us the identity of ourselves in those two moments; the
present, suppose, and that immediately past; or the present, and that a
month, a year, or twenty years past. Or, in other words, by reflecting
upon that which is myself now, and that which was myself twenty years
ago, I discern they are not two, but one and the same self.

But though consciousness of what is past does thus ascertain our
personal identity to ourselves, yet, to say that it makes personal
identity, or is necessary to our being the same persons, is to say, that
a person has not existed a single moment, nor done one action, but what
he can remember; indeed none but what he reflects upon. And one should
really think it self-evident, that consciousness of personal identity
presupposes, and therefore cannot constitute, personal identity, any
more than knowledge, in any other case, can constitute truth, which it
presupposes.

This wonderful mistake may possibly have arisen from hence, that to be
endued with consciousness, is inseparable from the idea of a person, or
intelligent being. For this might be expressed inaccurately thus--that
consciousness makes personality; and from hence it might be concluded to
make personal identity. But though present consciousness of what we at
present do and feel, is necessary to our being the persons we now are;
yet present consciousness of past actions, or feelings, is not necessary
to our being the same persons who performed those actions, or had those
feelings.

The inquiry, what makes vegetables the same in the common acceptation of
the word, does not appear to have any relation to this of personal
identity; because the word *same*, when applied to them and to persons,
is not only applied to different subjects, but it is also used in
different senses. For when a man swears to the same tree, as having
stood fifty years in the same place, he means only the same as to all
the purposes of property and uses of common life, and not that the tree
has been all that time the same in the strict philosophical sense of the
word. For he does not know whether any one particle of the present tree
be the same with any one particle of the tree which stood in the same
place fifty years ago. And if they have not one common particle of
matter, they cannot be the same tree, in the proper philosophic sense of
the word *same* ; it being evidently a contradiction in terms, to say
they are, when no part of their substance, and no one of their
properties, is the same; no part of their substance, and by the
supposition; no one of their properties, because it is allowed that the
same property cannot be transferred from one substance to another. And
therefore, when we say the identity or sameness of a plant consists in a
continuation of the same life communicated under the same organization,
to a number of particles of manner, whether the same or not, the word
*same*, when applied to life and to organization, cannot possibly be
understood to signify, what it signifies in this very sentence, when
applied to matter. In a loose and popular sense, then, the life, and the
organization, and the plant, are justly said to be the same,
notwithstanding the perpetual change of the parts. But in a strict and
philosophical manner of speech, no man, no being, no mode of being, nor
any thing, can be the same with that, with which it hath indeed nothing
the same. Now, sameness is used in this latter sense when applied to
persons. The identity of these, therefore, cannot subsist with diversity
of substance. The thing here considered, and demonstratively, as I
think, determined, is proposed by Mr. Locke in these words, *Whether
it*, i.e., the same self or person, *be the same identical substance*?
And he has suggested what is a much better answer to the question than
that which he give it in form. For he defines person, *a thinking
intelligent being*, etc. and personal identity *the sameness of a
rational being*.[^1] The question then is, whether the same rational
being is the same substance; which needs no answer, because being and
substance, in this place, stand for the same idea. The ground of the
doubt, whether the same person be the same substance, is said to be
this; that the consciousness of our own existence in youth and in old
age, or in any two joint successive moments, is not *the same individual
action*[^2] i.e., not the same consciousness, but different successive
consciousnesses. Now it is strange that this should have occasioned such
perplexities. For it is surely conceivable, that a person may have a
capacity of knowing some object or other to be the same now, which it
was when he contemplated it formerly; yet, in this case, where, by the
supposition, the object is perceived to be the same, the perception of
it in any two moments cannot be one and the same perception. And thus,
though the successive consciousnesses which we have of our own existence
are not the same, yet are they consciousnesses of one and the same thing
or object; of the same person, self, or living agent. The person, of
whose existence the consciousness is felt now, and was felt an hour or a
year ago, is discerned to be, not two persons, but one and the same
person; and therefore is one and the same.

Mr. Locke's observations upon this subject appear hasty; and he seems to
profess himself dissatisfied with suppositions, which he has made
relating to it.[^3] But some of those hasty observations have been
carried to a strange length by others; whose notion, when traced and
examined to the bottom, amounts, I think, to this:[^4] "That personality
is not a permanent, but a transient thing: that it lives and dies,
begins and ends, continually: that no one can any more remain one and
the same person two moments together, than two successive moments can be
one and the same moment: that our substance is indeed continually
changing; but whether this be so or not, is, it seems, nothing to the
purpose; since it is not substance, but consciousness alone, which
constitutes personality; which consciousness, being successive, cannot
be the same in any two moments, nor consequently the personality
constituted by it." And from hence it must follow, that is a fallacy
upon ourselves, to charge our present selves with any thing we did, or
to imagine our present selves interested in any thing which befell us
yesterday, or that our present self will be interested in what will
befall us tomorrow; since our present self is not, in reality, the same
with the self of yesterday, but another like self or person coming in
its room, and mistaken for it; to which another self will succeed
tomorrow. This, I say, must follow: for if the self or person of today,
and that of tomorrow, are not the same, but only like persons, the
person of today is really no more interested in what will befall the
person of tomorrow, than in what will befall any other person. It may be
thought, perhaps, that this is not a just representation of the opinion
we are speaking of; because those who maintain it allow, that a person
is the same as far back as his remembrance reaches. And, indeed, they do
use the words, *identity* and *same* person. Nor will language permit
these words to be laid aside: since if they were, there must be, I know
not what, ridiculous periphrasis substituted in the room of them. But
they cannot, consistently with themselves, mean, that the person is
really the same. For it is self-evident, that the personality cannot be
really the same, if, as they expressly assert, that in which it consists
is not the same. And as, consistently with themselves, they cannot, so,
I think, it appears they do not, mean, that the person is *really* the
same, but only that he is so in a fictitious sense: in such a sense only
as they assert; for this they do assert, that any number of persons
whatever may be the same person. The bare unfolding this notion, and
laying it thus naked and open, seems the best confutation of it.
However, since great stress is said to be put upon it, I add the
following things:

*First*, This notion is absolutely contradictory to that certain
conviction, which necessarily, and every moment, rises within us, when
we turn our thoughts upon ourselves; when we reflect upon what is past,
and look forward upon what is to come. All imagination of a daily change
of that living agent which each man calls himself, for another, or of
any such change throughout our whole present life, is entirely borne
down by our natural sense of things. Nor is it possible for a person in
his wits to alter his conduct, with regard to his health or affairs,
from a suspicion, that though he should live tomorrow, he should not,
however, be the same person he is today. And yet, if it be reasonable to
act, with respect to a future life, upon this notion, that personality
is transient; it is reasonable to act upon it, with respect to the
present. Here then is a notion equally applicable to religion and to our
temporal concerns; and every one sees and feels the inexpressible
absurdity of it in the latter case. If, therefore, any can take up with
it in the former, this cannot proceed from the reason of the thing, but
must be owing to an inward unfairness, and secret corruption of heart.

*Secondly*, It is not an idea, or abstract notion, or quality, but a
being only which is capable of life and action, of happiness and misery.
Now all beings confessedly continue the same, during the whole time of
their existence. Consider then a living being now existing, and which
has existed for any time alive: this living being must have done and
suffered and enjoyed, what it has done and suffered and enjoyed formerly
(this living being, I say, and not another), as really as it does and
suffers and enjoys, what it does and suffers and enjoys this instant.
All these successive actions, enjoyments, and sufferings, are actions,
enjoyments and sufferings, of the same living being. And they are so,
prior to all consideration of its remembering or forgetting; since
remembering or forgetting can make no alteration in the truth of past
matter of fact. And suppose this being endued with limited powers of
knowledge and memory, there is no more difficulty in conceiving it to
have a power of knowing itself to be the same living being which it was
some time ago, of remembering some of its actions, sufferings, and
enjoyments, and forgetting others, than in conceiving it to know, or
remember or forget any thing else.

*Thirdly*, Every person is conscious, that he is now the same person or
self he was, as far back as his remembrance reaches; since, when any one
reflects upon a past action of his own he is just as certain of the
person who did that action, namely himself, the person who now reflects
upon it, as he is certain that the action was at all done. Nay, very
often a person's assurance of an action having been done, of which he is
absolutely assured, arises wholly from the consciousness that he himself
did it. And this he, person, or self, must either be a substance, or the
property of some substance. If he, if person, to be a substance; then
consciousness that he is the same person, is consciousness that he is
the same substance. If the person, or he, be the property of a
substance; still consciousness that he is the same property, is as
certain a proof that his substance remains the same, as consciousness
that he remains the same substance would be; since the same property
cannot be transferred from one substance to another.

But though we are thus certain that we are the same agents, living
beings, or substances, now, which we were as far back as our remembrance
reaches; yet it is asked, whether we may not possibly be deceived in it?
And this question may be asked at the end of any demonstration whatever;
because it is a question concerning the truth of perception by memory.
And he who can doubt, whether perception by memory can in this sense be
depended upon, may doubt also, whether perception by deduction and
reasoning, which also include memory, or, indeed, whether intuitive
perception can. Here then we can go no farther. For it is ridiculous to
attempt to prove the truth of those perceptions, whose truth we can no
otherwise prove, than by other perceptions of exactly the same kind with
them, and which there is just the same ground to suspect; or to attempt
to prove the truth of our faculties, which can no otherwise be proved,
than by the use or means of those very suspected faculties themselves.

[^1]: Locke's Works, vol i. p. 146.

[^2]: Ibid., pp. 146, 147.

[^3]: Ibid., p. 152.

[^4]: See an answer to Dr. Clarke's third defense of his letter to Mr.
    Dodwell, 2d edit. pp. 44, 56, etc.

  [The Analogy of Religion]: http://books.google.com/books/about/Analogy_of_religion.html?id=8YUBAAAAYAAJ
