---
course: Philosophy 363
author: David Sanson
title: First Level, Third Attempt
instructor: David Sanson
term: Spring 2016
section: assignments
...

Third Attempt
==============

If this is your second or third attempt to complete Level 1, then you are in
the right place: complete this worksheet. To be turned in in class, Tuesday,
Feb 16th.

Validity
========

So that the following arguments are **invalid** by describing a possible
situation in which the premises are all true and the conclusion false.

A. 
    1.  The correct theory of truth must entail every instance of the
        T-schema.
    2.  The correspondence theory of truth entails every instance of the
        T-schema.
    3.  Therefore, the correspondence theory of truth is the correct theory of
        truth.

B.  
    1.  Everything true is useful.
    2.  Therefore, everything useful is true. 


Soundness
=========

Provide a good reason for thinking that the following valid arguments are not
**sound**---that is, indicate which premise you think is mostly likely false
and why.

C.  1.   'Snow is white' is true iff snow is white. 
    2.   'Snow is white' is true iff the belief that snow is white coheres
         with our other beliefs.
    3.   Therefore, snow is white iff the belief that snow is white coheres
         with our other beliefs.

D.  1.  The purpose of moral discourse is to express attitudes of approval
        or disapproval.
    2.  If the purpose of moral discourse is to express attitudes of approval
        or disapproval, then moral statements are neither true nor false.
    3.  Therefore, moral statements are neither true nor false.


Identifying Arguments
=====================

From the assigned reading (Tarski) find two passages that contain an argument,
two that contain illustrations, and two that contain explanations. For
each passage, give me a page reference and paragraph, and the first few
words that begin the passage and the last few words that end it.
