---
course: Philosophy 363
author: David Sanson
title: First Level, Second Attempt
instructor: David Sanson
term: Spring 2016
section: assignments
...

Second Attempt
==============

If this is your second attempt to complete Level 1, then you are in the right
place: complete this worksheet. To be turned in in class, Tuesday, Feb 3rd.

Validity
========

To say that an argument is **valid** is to say that it is impossible for
the premises to be true, but the conclusion false. So you can show that
an argument is **invalid** by constructing a **counterexample** to its
validity: that is, by describing a possible situation in which the
premises are all true, but the conclusion false.

Here are some invalid arguments. For each one, construct a
counterexample.

A. 
    1.  An experience is good only if it provides pleasure. 
    2.  Therefore, goodness is pleasure.

B.  
    1.  Skeptics accept the correspondence theory of truth.
    2.  We have no reason to accept skepticism.
    3.  Therefore, we have no reason to accept the correspondence theory of
        truth.

Soundness
=========

To say that an argument is **sound** is to say that it is valid **and**
all of its premises are true. So you can show that an argument is not
sound either by showing that it is not valid, as above, or by showing
that one of its premises is false. For each of the following arguments,
indicate which premise you think is mostly likely to be false, and why
you think it is the most likely to be false.

C.  1.  If someone has died, then they no longer exist. 
    2.  You cannot bury something that does not exist.
    3.  Therefore, you cannot bury someone who has died.

D.  1.  When choosing among views, we should accept the view that coheres best
        with our other beliefs.
    2.  The coherence theory of truth coheres best with our other beliefs.
    3.  Therefore, we should accept the coherence theory of truth.



Identifying Arguments
=====================

An **argument** is a series of statements---the **premises**---presented as
reasons in support of a claim---the **conclusion**. Arguments are different
than **reports**, **illustrations**, **explanations**, and **conditional
statements**.

From the assigned reading (Tarski) find two passages that contain an argument,
two that contain illustrations, and two that contain explanations. For
each passage, give me a page reference and paragraph, and the first few
words that begin the passage and the last few words that end it.
