---
course: Philosophy 363
author: David Sanson
title: First Level, First Attempt
instructor: David Sanson
term: Spring 2016
section: assignments
...

The first level is meant to ensure that you understand the basic toolkit
needed to identify and analyze arguments. You might already have this
toolkit from other philosophy classes. For a brief refresher, you might
want to take a look at

Alyssa Ney, "[Logic for
    Metaphysics](/363rn/ney-logic-for-metaphysics.pdf)", which is
    chapter 0 from her 2014 *Metaphysics: An Introduction*.

Frances Howard-Snyder, Daniel Howard-Snyder, and Ryan Wasserman,
    "[Arguments and Nonarguments](/363rn/howard-snyder-arguments.pdf)", which
    is section 2.1 of their 2013 *The Power of Logic*.

This assignment should be turned in in class, on Tuesday, January 19th.

Validity
========

To say that an argument is **valid** is to say that it is impossible for
the premises to be true, but the conclusion false. So you can show that
an argument is **invalid** by constructing a **counterexample** to its
validity: that is, by describing a possible situation in which the
premises are all true, but the conclusion false.

Here are some invalid arguments. For each one, construct a
counterexample.

A. 
    1.  All facts are true. 
    2.  Some beliefs are true. 
    3. Therefore, some beliefs are facts.

B.  
    1. Everything you believe is true. 
    2. You don't believe that eating unhealthy food is wrong. 
    3. Therefore, it is not true that eating unhealthy food is wrong.

Soundness
=========

To say that an argument is **sound** is to say that it is valid **and**
all of its premises are true. So you can show that an argument is not
sound either by showing that it is not valid, as above, or by showing
that one of its premises is false. For each of the following arguments,
indicate which premise you think is mostly likely to be false, and why
you think it is false.

C.  1.  Everything true is beautiful and everything beautiful is true.
    2.  It is true that some people lie sometimes.
    3.  Therefore, is it beautiful that some people lie sometimes.

D.  1.  Harry Potter is a wizard.
    2.  If Harry Potter is a wizard, then wizards exist.
    3.  Therefore, wizards exist.

Identifying Arguments
=====================

An **argument** is a series of statements---the **premises**---presented as
reasons in support of a claim---the **conclusion**. Arguments are different
than **reports**, **illustrations**, **explanations**, and **conditional
statements**.

From the assigned readings, find two passages that contain an argument,
two that contain illustrations, and two that contain explanations. For
each passage, give me a page reference and paragraph, and the first few
words that begin the passage and the last few words that end it.
